a un commission has found Israeli
authorities responsible for carrying out
war crimes and crimes against humanity
in Gaza the report says Israeli
authorities committed the crimes of
starvation murder intentional attacks
against civilians torture and outrages
upon personal dignity in Gaza evacuation
routes and designated safe areas were
consistently targeted by Israeli forces
that the commission determined amounted
to the forcible transfer of people
Israel imposed a total Siege
constituting in Collective punishment
and denied Palestinians essential
Necessities such as water food
electricity Fuel and humanitarian
assistance for strategic and political
purposes the report says Israeli forces
also committed acts of sexual violence
torture and inhuman treatment in the
West Bank plastic calls on the Israeli
government to immediately Implement a
ceasefire lift the siege of Gaza ensure
the delivery of humanitarian Aid and
cease targeting civilians it also urges
the Palestinian government and
authorities in Gaza to cease all rocket
attacks on Israel and unconditionally
release all hostages the commission also
found Hamas and other Palestinian armed
groups responsible for war crimes
including deliberate targeting of
civilians and taking
captives wavi P the chair of the un's
commission of inquiry presented the
report's findings to the Human Rights
Council in
Geneva Israeli authorities are
responsible for war crimes crimes
against humanity and violations of
international
humanitarian and human rights law
including
extermination intentionally directing
attacks against civilians and civilian
objects murder or willful killing using
starvation as a method of War forcable
transfer gender persecution targeting
Palestinian men and boys sexual and
gender-based violence amounting to
torture and cruel or inhuman
treatment Michael Mansfield is an
international lawyer and joins us live
from Birmingham in the UK good to have
you with us first of all what do you
make of this
report well I think it's an extremely
opportune and important
report because of course the it has to
be remembered that in the background we
have the ICC has through its Chief
prosecutor issued warrants for the
arrest of various
individuals uh alleging exactly what the
UN committee has
found so it is the justification for
what he was doing if it if it was needed
it is needed because you had an
automatic response from America which
was as well as Israel to criticize and
almost punish the international criminal
court for daring to even investigate let
alone issue warrants for their arrest
so it seems to me that this is an
important report on that scale next also
alongside you have the international
court of justice where South
Africa was uh litigating the whole issue
of um the crimes being committed and
particularly in the context of genocide
and the genocide convention well this
report goes further than anything so far
and the court has been very reticent and
has only talked about plausible rights
and so on but actually this establishes
it seems to me a very strong not just
Prime facial case but goes further than
that I I'm not going to say conclusive
but it's certainly a long way towards
being conclusive so I think it's a very
important report when you look at the
international court of justice and
finally of course the UN itself if it's
going to bring out these reports it's
got to do something about not just call
for an a ceasefire maybe it's got to
consider the possibility of intervention
here which of course the charter
originally allowed for in order to
stabilize areas of the world where
Warfare essentially was getting out of
control but you you say that but do you
think it will spark any actual
action well immediate action no is the
straight answer to to you it isn't but
uh it is on another front I left the
action to ask because I know the
problems with the United Nations and the
security Council and the divisions and
all the rest of it that we're familiar
with between America Russia and the UK
sitting on the fence as usual however I
think the importance of this report is
to counter the really quite disgraceful
attacks on the IC doing its job and Duty
properly that has been brought about by
the US supported by Israel and the
United Kingdom what do they say oh well
it doesn't
help I mean that's about the weakest
response you could imagine so it seems
to me this report can now be used by
those are approaching litigation of any
kind domestically or internationally to
say we have an authoritative report here
seems to me it's authoritative and
you're not going to do much better than
this and it seems to me that should be
fueling all the initiatives including
the other possibility on a domestic
front of the the BDS campaign where
people are boycotting and divesting and
sanctioning a country which is involved
Israel in particular and not the only
one obviously but Israel mainly is
focusing on well the word been used
extermination but of course it it just
plays more into Israel's narrative
doesn't it that the UN is biased against
it the report calls for an immediate Hal
to military operations but we know that
it's simply going to be dismissed by
Israel yes my observation about Israel
is that it doesn't matter what the
organization is unless the
organization is supporting
its objectives and its priorities then
it is automatically either regarded as
and called anti-semitic or it is
regarded as hostile uh to their
objectives and so on so you know it I I
think whether it's the UN or any other
organization the fact is there isn't
another organization with any
credibility internationally and it seems
that this is a very important step and
if we're going to at least look towards
the future of a kind of civilized
situation then the United Nations has to
be given support and the political uh as
it were divisions that are right at the
top as it were in the security Council
they have to be reformed it's a very
good case for reforming how the security
Council works the rest of the United
Nations does some incredible work
particularly providing aid aid in a
circumstance where Israel and others
used you know so you know what the
situation absolutely Michael Mansfield
we really appreciate your time thanks so
much for taking the time to join us
there from the
UK Let's cross over now to Geneva where
we can speak to our diplomatic editor
James Bas he's at the UN Human Rights
Council where that report was briefed a
little earlier James the report a stark
reminder isn't it of the brutalities of
this war gave an extensive list of war
crimes it really is a very detailed
report and very very Grim reading if you
read all of it uh summing up what has
happened since the 7th of October the
session of the Human Rights Council on
the commission of inquiry hearing from
the commission of inquiry has paused for
the lunch break which means we're able
to speak to the chair of the commission
of inquiry NE P who's with me now uh you
spoke when you spoke to the council
about the enormity of the situation and
I think people know you you're the
former High Commissioner of Human Rights
you had a very distinguished judicial
career as well have you ever seen
anything like this before we have never
seen anything like this and this extent
and that's why I said even the attack on
United Nations unprecedented the number
of victims unprecedented has never
happened before uh in every other
commission's report so the figures are
unbelievable so I delivered the report
and I pointedly asked the member states
to read the two big conference papers
that accompany the report the report is
itself is limited to
10,700 words and with this enormous
conflict how can we put details in there
I notice from the reaction of both
Palestine and Israel the ambassadors
said we didn't address their issues
sufficiently I will be telling them to
read the detailed papers that accompany
this enormous task but I truly value
this kind of interactive dialogue I
value that this Human Rights Council
took it out of the political Arena
really and planted it squarely in terms
of international law speaker after
speaker Ambassador after Ambassador
today supported our recommendation of
respect for international law for
justice and
accountability when I've read through
the report and there's a lot to read it
seems to me and yours is an ongoing
investigation but even though you've
covered so much there are perhaps things
that aren't in it I'm thinking for
example tax on hospitals and medical
facilities I mean is there more to come
there's much more to come we had to cut
cut off our presentation from 7th
October to 31st December our next report
will be delivered before the general
assembly at the United Nations in New
York and that'll cover what you've just
described um and and the effect of
Education of children for instance all
these are important in this report we
also we did investigate sexual violence
on both
sides
um I think it's tragic that Israel is
preventing us from seeing victims inside
Israel you know the Ambassador described
uh people she knew personally a mother
who lost a child the effects of sexual
violence then how can they
explain that they preventing those
victims from seeing un commissioner
commission that will Faithfully
investigate and get the voices of their
victims out because you've not been
allowed to go to Gaza you've not been
allowed to go to Israel you are you are
not allowed to operate according to the
Israelis but of course the international
court of justice has said you should be
there I welcome that the one of the very
strident recommendations from the
international court of justice is that
the commission the UN Commission in
charge of Investigation be allowed to
the allowed there and you know even I
hoped as a law abiding person that
Israel will comply with that specific
order of the icj we've written to them
and we have no response as we have had
no response to our repeated uh requests
in the past for Access and what I find
particularly disturbing is they not only
deny us access into Israel and Gaza but
whole of Palestine we need to talk to
the victims there as well um you know
there's been some complaint that we have
not investigated sexual violence fully
on the part of Israeli soldiers and
Palestinian women well we need to get
there to speak to the victims
ourselves and I'm going the commission
will think about how we can take this
further there's an order of Courts
ordering Israel to let us in and they
not in compliance you talk about the
international court of justice there's
the international criminal court as well
and you're well aware that the
prosecutor there wants arrest warrants
he wants those to be granted given all
of the evidence that you've seen and you
can make legal findings as well although
you're not a court do you think there'll
be more cases coming in the
international criminal court well I
can't speak for the prosecutor but I can
tell you auth
authoritatively that we have a
memorandum of understanding with the
prosecutor and we have now furnished
them with like 7,000 pieces of
information video material uh and and
the open source material that we have
verified our information comes from the
entire United Nations all the different
agencies so we have shared the
information I'd like to think that that
would have been very helpful for them to
draft their and as a former prosecutor
yourself do you think that information
that is actionable all the information
you've shared just a correction I'm not
a former prosecutor always on the side
of
Defense former judge of that Court yeah
the
ICC um when we say we we ourselves draw
draw a
conclusion that the occupation is the is
unlawful now and that is now before the
icj and when we say crimes such as we
named are being committed in both U on
October 7th by Hamas and also by Israeli
military forces we are basing that on
evidence and facts that we've gathered
so therefore I think I'm on safe ground
in thinking that if the judges get to
see that kind of detailed
evidence I don't see why they wouldn't
come to a similar conclusion on the
crimes that are being committed that
violate international law thank you very
much for talking to Al I know you've got
to go and address a news conference in a
moment so we won't keep you anymore but
thank you for speaking to us uh here at
uh the UN Geneva headquarters European
headquarters of the UN where the UN um
Human Rights Council has been s sitting
listening uh to that Commission of
inquiry and that very very damning
detailed report that you've been hearing
about James Baye many thanks
indeed make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer